The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Gracious Designs of God, by John Church


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: The Gracious Designs of God
       accomplished by the malice of His enemies


Author: John Church



Release Date: December 26, 2018  [eBook #58535]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GRACIOUS DESIGNS OF GOD***


Transcribed from the 1819 R. Thomas edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org

                   [Picture: Public domain book cover]





                               THE GRACIOUS
                              DESIGNS OF GOD
                             _ACCOMPLISHED_,
                                  BY THE
                          MALICE OF HIS ENEMIES.


                         _BEING THE SUBSTANCE OF_

                               An Address,

               Delivered on WEDNESDAY, November 24th, 1819,

                        AT THE SURREY TABERNACLE,

                              BY J. CHURCH,

                   _Being the Day of his Deliverance_.

                                * * * * *

     Commit thy Way unto the LORD; trust also in him, and he shall bring
                     it to pass.—PSALM xxxvii, 5th Verse.

                                * * * * *

                                SOUTHWARK:
             PRINTED BY R. THOMAS, RED LION STREET, BOROUGH.

                                  1819.

                                * * * * *




AN ADDRESS, &c.


              _But God meant it unto good_.—GEN. l. 20th verse.

THE sacred pages are designed by the God of all grace, to reveal the
glorious salvation of lost, ruined, guilty man.  The adorable Author of
this inestimable blessing, with its amazing contrivance, and the means
appointed for the knowledge and enjoyment of it—the eternal love of God
as the source, the finished work of Christ, God-Man Mediator, and the
gracious energy and operations of the Holy-making Spirit, are the
appointed means for the accomplishment and application of this glorious
salvation.  This is the subject matter of the Gospel, as set forth in the
word, and experienced by all who are taught of God; and while we would
adore the sacred Trinity in Unity, for the revelation of his gracious
will, in the matter of a sinner’s salvation from merited ruin, so we
desire, at the same time, to search the scriptures for all the suited
promises and encouragements therein given to the believer, in his
complicated trials; and whatever may be the nature of those trials, the
Bible fully assures him, that a covenant God has marked out his path in
love, and in infinite wisdom; and though the hand of God may lay heavy
upon him in deep afflictions, and the dispensations of divine providence
may be very dark, and his trials very severe, it is a mercy to know, to
believe, and be enabled to rest on the Staff of divine faithfulness; ever
bearing in mind, that the grand design of every conflict, is to answer
the purposes of the divine glory; and, ultimately, to bring the believer
to himself, to great nearness and conformity to Christ, and, finally, to
everlasting bliss.  For our light afflictions, which are but for a
moment, worketh for us an exceeding and eternal weight glory, while we
look not at the things which are temporal.

The instrument a wise and gracious Father may use, to answer these ends,
may be singular; and frequently they are those who are very dear to our
hearts, and nearly allied in nature, profession, or friendship.  Such,
alas! may be permitted to distress the mind and grieve the heart, by the
exercise of malice, arising from some predominant evil disposition, and
frequently without any apparent cause, save that of envy; but the Lord
who has decreed to permit this, has also decreed to over-rule it, for our
spiritual, and sometimes even for our temporal good.  The Lord very
frequently makes the evil devised against us by Satan and his emissaries,
answer many valuable purposes; and so wisely manages those things, which
appear to be the greatest evils, to be the greatest advantage to us, and
to effect his own glory in some mysterious way.  Our mercy, under every
dispensation, is to lay passive in his hand, to believe in his love, and
to be humbled before him, well knowing that he worketh all things after
the counsel of his own will; and while the mind is thus engaged to hear,
also on universal goodwill to those who may injure us, quite forgetting,
and freely forgiving them, as we have been forgiven, to conceal as much
as possible their infirmities, even while we plead our own innocence; and
in exculpating ourselves, we cannot be too careful to avoid reflecting
upon those, who have dealt so cruelly with us.  This is the spirit of
true religion and genuine christianity.

I am led into these observations from the history before us, an history
fraught with deep instruction to the Lord’s people.  Few can read this
tale unmoved, and all must see the propriety of Solomon’s remark:—Who can
stand before envy?  Our first father Adam could not, nor pious Abel, nor
David; yea, the Son of God himself fell a victim to this malign
influence, this satanic principle; and the history of the pious patriarch
Joseph, is another awful evidence of this truth.  I recommend this
history to you, and hope you will gain much spiritual instruction; but
above all, do not let this very interesting consideration pass unnoticed,
in almost every circumstance recorded of Joseph,—that a greater than
Joseph is here, one infinitely more illustrious, even the person of the
dear and adorable Redeemer, the spiritual Joseph, the _Zaaph Paaneah_,
the Revealer of gospel secrets, and the Saviour of the Land.  Dear indeed
to the Father, as the Son of his love, and the Object of his delight; as
God, as God-Man, as the Head of his Elect Body; and the Mediator,
Righteousness, and Glory of his Church; while all the promises and
prophecies, shadows and types, with every illustrious character in the
old Testament history, pointed to him, and shadowed him forth to the
faith of the Church before his coming; and indicated his deep
humiliation, and his final exaltation, when angels and saints should
adore him, in our nature, as the Lamb in the midst of the throne, while
ungodly sinners and devils should tremble at his presence.  His holy
nature, like Joseph’s coat of distinguished favour, was sweetly and
richly diversified with the various graces of the Holy Spirit.
Commissioned by his Father, agreeable to ancient stipulation, and
covenant agreement, he came to seek the eternal felicity of his brethren.
But Oh! the dreadful blindness and enmity of the human heart, even many
of those who were dear to him, became his betrayers and murderers: a
Judah sold his brother for twenty pieces of silver, and a Judas sold his
master for ten more.  He was tempted by the world, but he resisted it:
falsely accused—he was imprisoned under the sentence of death, in all its
horrid forms; and when on the Cross his divine compassion, and his awful
sovereignty, was displayed in saving a fellow sufferer, and hearing the
other in his awful state of rebellion.  The appointed hour of his
exaltation was come, and he was taken from prison and from death; raised,
spiritualized, and conquering, he again revealed what merciful and awful
events would take place in the land of Judea: he was received up into
glory, the human nature was exalted into high and glorious union with the
Deity, and as God-Man, to him every knee shall bow, and own him Lord of
all.  The treasures of grace are in his hands, for the benefit of his
people, and to him all must come for the supply of their wants; while his
adorable hand of awful, but gracious providence, executes the purposes of
his grace, and brings the objects of his love, and the purchase of his
blood, to his feet.  Convinced of their enmity, envy and cruelty,
ignorance and contempt, they, by the power of all-conquering grace, are
brought to seek his favour, confess their sins, supplicate his throne,
and obtain the pardon of their transgressions.  To these he makes himself
known, and treats them as brethren and friends, without upbraiding them.

This is compassion, like a God: they are invited to dwell near him, and
the spiritual good of all the land is before them, as the earnest of that
glory which he has in reversion for them.  Fresh scenes in providence are
opened to them; trouble, age, or sickness comes on, death and eternity is
in view, doubts and fears may again invade the mind, in the bitter
reflection of past sins.  The soul once more drops at the feet of Jesus,
and once more petitions him to forgive and forget his folly—the bowels of
mercy yearn in the loving heart of our elder Brother, over us, and he
again renews the promise of pardon, with power to the soul, that we may
go down to the grave in peace.  And as it respects their conduct to him,
he calls up their attention to the design of God, in all his
dispensations; that God meant to glorify the riches of his grace, and in
their salvation to make himself a glorious name.  _Now_, _therefore_, _be
ye not grieved nor angry with yourselves_; _ye thought evil against me_,
_but God meant it unto good_.

This is evident, when we take a view of the conduct of Joseph’s brethren,
and the over-ruling their malice and cruelty, to answer the appointed
end.  Ah! little did those persons know what God intended to do, when
they maliciously combined to destroy him; but, being restrained from
their diabolical purpose, they were directed, or rather impelled, by an
unseen power, to sell him for a slave.  But God meant to honour Joseph,
to make his own name glorious in an idolatrous land; to save many nations
from ruin, to preserve their very lives who had designed to take away
their brother’s; to the family of Israel, till they should become a great
nation; to fulfil his own promises to Abraham, through whom the Messiah
was to spring.  Thus God meant it unto good.

I proceed to illustrate this truth, by a variety of important
circumstances.—The dreadful fall of man effected by the malice of Satan,
who hated the image of God, and envied the felicity of our first
parents—who meant to destroy them, and eternally ruin all whom they
represented.  Satan, alas! succeeded, in a measure; but God, who had
decreed to permit that wretch to manifest his malice against him, decreed
also to over-rule it: he meant it unto good, even to magnify his grace,
display his power, testify his hatred to sin, glorify his justice,
manifest his wisdom, and shew his amazing love, in the gift of his dear
Son, for their redemption from sin, the worst of evils, and from hell,
the worst of miseries.  Thus God meant it unto good.

This fact may be clearly seen in the amazing history of our dear Lord.
God permitted Satan to go out of his limitted bounds, and to use his
utmost influence to destroy the Prince of Life.  He urged that
blood-hound, Herod, to murder the Babes of Bethlehem, in hopes of
destroying the Saviour of guilty man.  While he preached the gospel,
wrought miracles, and was working out a righteousness for his dear
people, Satan stirred up the Scribes and Pharisees, the Jews and Priests,
to vent all the malice of their hearts against him, and so hold him up to
public contempt; and in his last conflicts, we may see the malice of men
and devils, by all the calumny and reproach, with a load of inconceivable
sorrow with which they loaded the immaculate Lamb of God.  The malice of
the Priests and Doctors of the Law, the weakness of Pilate, and the rage
of an easy persuaded populace—herein we see the malice of Satan: he
thought evil against the Saviour, but God meant it for good, and effected
only what he had before determined to bring about.  The intentions of the
enemy, and the designs of Jehovah, were infinitely remote; the God of all
grace meant to glorify all his sublime perfections, by the obedience,
sufferings, and conquests of the Saviour—the magnifying his holy law, the
satisfying his own justice, and the redemption of his Church; the
overthrow of Satan’s empire, and the downfal of sin and death—Thus God
meant it unto good.

We may trace this subject still further, and take a view of the
sufferings of the martyrs in every age, from the days of righteous Abel,
to the last saint who may be called to seal the truth with his blood.
Those who loved the Saviour, and loved not their lives unto death,
endured every species of persecution, for the love they bore to truth,
having felt its power, and enjoyed its reality, were opposers of Satan’s
kingdom, and Satan aimed to extirpated them from the earth: but the more
the truth has been opposed, the more the church has been oppressed, the
more it has ever prospered: what their enemies aimed at, was to degrade
the religion of the Son of God, to abolish the gospel, and to ruin
immortal souls; but in this they have ever failed, and ever will, because
God has meant the sufferings of his people, and the malice of their
enemies, to good.  The history of the experience of saints, in all ages,
prove the same, as may be seen in the trial of Abraham, when called to
sacrifice his Son; and by faith he obtained this name, the Father of the
faithful, and the Friend of God.  In the deep trials, and accumulated
afflictions of Job, Satan plotted against him, to destroy him—he traduced
him as an hypocrite before God, though he was the most sincere man then
living; he extended his malice to the ruin of his family, in order to
provoke him to curse God.  He stirred up his wife for the same tremendous
purpose, and then set his brethren to accuse him of hypocrisy, of living
in some secret sin, alledging that such uncommon trials never befel a
real saint, as befel Job; but this was judging after the flesh, for which
the Lord afterwards reproved them; and though they were good men, yet
they did not speak the thing that was right, concerning God or his
servant Job.  Yet these things were all meant by infinite wisdom for
good; to answer God’s own gracious purposes, to shew Job the desperate
evil of his own heart, and the insufficiency of his own righteousness, to
justify him before God.

The oppression of the Israelites in Egypt, was intended to break the
backs and the hearts of God’s people, but God intended to get himself a
glorious name in their deliverance, and the overthrow of their enemies.
When Korah, Dathan, and Abiram conspired against the Priesthood, this was
a sore affliction to Moses and Aaron; their aim was to degrade the
priestly office, and to bring the Lord’s own servants into contempt
amongst the people; this was permitted, as God intended to over-rule it,
that his servants might be more fully confirmed in their office, to honor
his own sacred institutions, and to give a public testimony of his
approbation of his own servants.  This was for good to them.  The hand of
the Lord was soon known among his servants, and his indignation towards
his enemies.  The history of David is another instance of this truth:
Satan stirred up Saul to hunt him as a Partridge upon the mountains;
Absalom and Ahithophel to plot against his life and his kingdom, with
almost innumerable foes all his reign.  Satan well knew that the Messiah
was to come of the seed of David, and it was at him he aimed, in all the
afflictions of David: but God meant it unto good, to answer many valuable
ends.  The Holy Spirit kept up his mind in great spirituality, and he was
then enabled to compose many blessed Psalms, which were, doubtless, a
peculiar blessing to the Saviour, on earth, and has been a choice
treasure to his tried family ever since.

We might proceed to illustrate this subject by a cloud of witnesses, but
you have the sacred pages in your hands, and can read them for
yourselves.  I might mention the history of Naomi and Ruth, of Mordecai
and Esther, and many more, but shall only remark, that the falling out of
brethren, and the divisions made in churches, though designed by Satan,
to put a stop to the spread and force of truth, yet, it has frequently
been found to bring about some gracious purpose of God, and the
dissemination of the very truth Satan aimed to stop in its progress.
This truth is found also in the daily experience of God’s children; and
however numerous their foes, and complicated their trials, it is the work
and wisdom of their faith to look above them, to the gracious purposes of
God, in covenant love and wisdom, who is working all things after the
counsel of his will.  It is true, the designs of God may be hid from the
believer’s view for a time, and the trial may be long, dark, and
distressing, yet, faith can rest upon this truth, The Lord hath his ways
of grace and mercy, in the whirlwind and in the storm; and though in
common trials we may be able to read God’s designs, and to trace the
footsteps of the flock, in our painful experience, yet there are cases to
be found amongst the Lord’s people, of an extraordinary nature, wherein
we can only exclaim with the Palmist, _Thy way_, _Oh God_, _is in the
sea_, _thy paths in the mighty waters_, _and thy footsteps are not
known_.  _Deep in unfathomable mines_.  Yet, as grace teaches, and faith
gathers strength, notwithstanding all our rebellion, self-will, unbelief
and carnal sense, suspicion, doubts, and fears, we are brought to stand
still, and watch till the Lord unfolds the mystery.  But

    Unbelief is sure to err,
       And scan his work in vain,
    God is his own interpreter,
       And he will make it plain.

Every thing that may befal the grace-taught christian, from his new
birth, till his glorification, is designed to do him good; yea, from his
infancy to his death, when called out of darkness into marvelous light.
Satan begins to display his envy and malice in a more terrible way, if
the good work is begun by a storm from Sinai, in a deep law-work on the
soul; he will endeavour to drive the poor sinner to black despair; and if
the work of God in the heart, is by more gentle means, he will try to
distress the soul, because the work has not been, in all respects, like
that which may be in another soul.  But even these, and every future
temptation, God means for good; they shew us the malice of Satan, they
drive us as prisoners of hope to the strong hold for strength, and make
us well acquainted with his devices.  When God hides his face, he only
means to shew us what we are without Christ; and when any saint is
permitted to fall into sin, God means to over-rule that fall, to humble
the soul, and shew it the need of divine keeping every moment.  Sin, as
daily felt within, and as perpetually trying the believer, is to shew us
our daily need of the Atonement, applied to the conscience; and our daily
infirmities shew us our need of a better, yea, of an infinitely
meritorious righteousness, wrought out by the dear God-Man Mediator, and
imputed to all that believe in him, for their complete justification
before God.  The reluctance which we often find to prayer, and every
other sacred duty, is meant to shew us our need of quickening, and
renewing grace; and the accusations of the enemy are meant to shew us our
need of an advocate with the Father.  God means that every loss and
cross, every trial, reproach, and mortification, whether deserved or not,
shall wean us from the world, beckon us home, and make us sit loose from
every undue attachment to the creature; and every grief, occasioned by
the loss of those who are dear to our hearts, is to shew us our need of
that ever-living, ever-loving, and everlasting Friend, even Jesus.  The
prevalence of error, is to stir up our zeal, to shew the reality of our
attachment and affection to Christ and his cause.  All this blessed work
is carried on by the power of God the Holy Spirit, in the hearts of those
who are loved with an everlasting love, chosen in Christ Jesus, redeemed
by his blood, kept by his powers and called by his grace.  Well may the
apostle mark it down as a branch of spiritual knowledge to the Church, in
these words—_And we know that all things work together for good_, _to
them that love God_, _and are the called according to his purpose_.

By way of concluding these general remarks, which are only designed to
stir up the mind by way of remembrance, and not merely to inform you
(because you already know these things) I would take this opportunity of
making only a few general observations on my late affairs—which may,
indeed, be very uninteresting to others, but it more especially relates
to the little circle of my own friends, to whom God has made me useful,
and who esteem me only for the truth’s sake.  I cannot, I do not expect
any others to notice it, except as usual, to turn it into ridicule, and
go on to hold it up, as well as myself, to contempt; but this I am so
inured to, that I regard it not, and though they ever intended much evil
against me, I am fully persuaded that God means it for good.

In the first place, I would bow my knees to the God of all grace and
mercy, and adore him for his stupendous love and condescension, his
power, his faithfulness and truth, which have been so long and so
conspicuously manifested to me, during the whole of this long and heavy
affliction—the health of body, the kind and miraculous providences, which
have been so abundantly bestowed upon me—the comforts and multiplied
favors which have been showered upon one so unworthy as I am, and while
deprived of the means of providence, I look back with holy wonder,
rapture, and surprize, at the wonder-working hand of my good God and
Father; but above all, for the aboundings of his grace in my soul,
through the gracious teachings and leadings of his Holy Spirit, that he
has more than ever led me to see the evil, the infinite evil there is in
sin, the depth of human depravity, the justice of God in the damnation of
sinners—his patience, kind forbearance, long sufferings and amazing
mercy.  These subjects have deeply affected my heart, and, I hope, yea, I
am sure, have overcome, melted me into godly sorrow, and deep humility.
The glorious plan of salvation has more than ever been opened to my
wondering view, and the ever gracious Almighty Spirit has made me
savingly acquainted with the person, the love, and the work of the dear
Redeemer, with the stability of his everlasting covenant, and the eternal
transactions of the Holy Three; before all worlds, concerning the
complete salvation of guilty man.

I bless, praise, and adore the Lord the Holy Spirit, that he has ever
thus visited my soul with his quickening, renewing, reproving, and
consoling influences; that in the place of my captivity he has again and
again assured my soul of her part and lot in himself, in the love of the
Father, and in the doing and dying of the Saviour; which has produced
evangelical repentance, increasing hatred to sin, fervent love to God,
and willing and cheerful obedience to his laws; that he has supported my
spirit in the deep affliction, and brought me near to himself; subdued
what was wrong, and led me to see wherein I have erred; chastened,
scourged, afflicted, tried, and brought me low; taught me many important
lessons for my future benefit, and glorified his own grace in my soul,
and has at last led me to say, he has done all things well, praise ye the
Lord.

In the second place, as is my duty to do, I make this public
acknowledgement of my gratitude, for the special, long, unwearied, and
unreserved kindness of my friends, to me, during this severe trial, which
has lasted above three years.  The support of myself, the support of my
children, and the ability afforded me for the relief of some hundreds,
during my confinement, and which relief and support has been owing to the
affection and sympathy of many females, from the very best and noblest
motives, also from some gentlemen in the fear and love of God—men, whose
conduct and characters are agreeable to the word of God, who have
accompanied their generosity with many prayers for the sanctification of
my troubles, and which prayers have, I believe, been answered to my
felicity, and, I trust, the future joy of their hearts, as influenced by
that holy charity that rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoices in the
truth.  Nor do I forget their kind exertions in the support of the cause
of God and truth, within these walls, though wrecked with dissentions,
and injured by many, who shall be nameless here, as I hope to forgive
every injury I have received.

I might here mention, were it prudent, some particular persons, whom the
Lord has raised up to seek the welfare of this oppressed Church—persons
whom I scarcely knew before, but who have been the instruments of much
good to us.  I beg them to accept this my warmest gratitude and
acknowledgement.

In the next place, I take this opportunity of returning my grateful
thanks to that large body of persons, who, though many were strangers to
me, did, so willingly, and in so kind a manner, readily subscribe their
names to the petition, which was presented to the Secretary of State for
my enlargement, and which was refused, for very judicious reasons; the
good effects of which we hope shortly to see.

While I am daily praying for grace, to walk worthy the honour done me, as
it respects my long afflictions and deep distresses of mind, I shall not
work upon your feelings in the detail of them, suffice it to say, that I
shall ever maintain that it was the most weak, cruel, and scandalous
prosecution, which ever took place in this highly favored land—had it
been justly merited, these were, besides the prosecution, such
unparalleled cruelties exercised towards me, as perhaps were never known
in the memory of man; but I forgive the prosecutor, and consider him only
as the tool of a party, and may God pardon his falsehoods.  But I cannot
easily forget the cruelty and joyful malice of little Doeg the Edomite,
Saul and Nabal, Rabshakeh, Rab Mag, Rab Saris, Samgar Nebo, and Nergal
Sharezer.

That the honorable and learned Judge, who tried the cause, should act as
he did, was not to be wondered at, when we reflect upon the
misrepresentations which were made to him; nor could any other verdict be
expected from a jury, however candid and impartial, when we call to mind
the circulation of the many thousand scandalous pamphlets, filled with
the most abominable falsehood—it is computed that above ten thousands
were circulated in a very few days, and some thousands which contained a
hundred palpable lies—What other verdict could naturally be expected?  I
beg leave, however to state, that I am not the less affected to the Law
of the Land, because I have been so severely and cruelly handled; the
situation I have just left has given me all opportunity to appreciate
their value.  I shall ever reverence and esteem them, and endeavour to
obey them, with the Laws of Christ; and in reference to myself, in my own
individual circumstances, I have paid the debt for the supposed violation
of them.  Whether guilty or not, is not _now_ the point, the debt of
_long_ affliction is paid, not do I wish my most inveterate foes to pass
through three such painful years as I have.  I trust, however, they are
satisfied.  I only aimed at giving satisfaction, by enduring the heavy
penalty; I might have avoided it, by quitting the country, after paying
the bail, which was but twenty pounds each; but I was conscious I had
done nothing of a criminal nature, that I was quite innocent of the
intent imputed to me—Why then should I gratify the wishes of certain
parties, by flying from my country and friends?  The _Laws_ of the land
are satisfied; the _Prosecutor_ is satisfied, although he had declared to
many that I was guilty of _no_ assault whatever.  Little _Doeg_ the
Edomite, is satisfied, although I never injured him, or spake
disrespectfully of his family; he is, no doubt, well pleased with the
long train of my inconceivable sorrows, the tears and distresses of my
children, and the grief of thousands.  _Many_ connected with the business
are satisfied, being well paid for their trouble.  _Envious Preachers_
are satisfied, that my popularity and public usefulness is for ever at an
end—_that_ part of the public, who were prejudiced, and who never took
the trouble to search into the business, but guided by bare hear-say,
these have been satisfied, that I have, in their opinion, met with my
deserts; but _those_, who best know about the affair, will _never_ be
satisfied with the cruelty I have experienced.

_I am_ satisfied that it was all divinely appointed, that it has taught
me many important lessons, and has produced the fruits of righteousness
to the glory of God.  The _Congregation_ is satisfied with my return to
them, in hopes of being more blest than they were before, by subjects of
truth, learnt in the school of deep affliction.  _Neighbours_ around, who
esteem me as a neighbour, are satisfied with my return, and my _Family_
particularly share in the satisfaction.  Thus, I hope, as all have
satisfaction, the matter of eleven years contention is at an end.

While I pray daily for grace to walk as becometh the gospel of Christ, in
holiness and righteousness, as an evidence of being delivered from my
enemies, and from the hand of those who unjustly hate me, that while they
intended me evil, God meant it unto good.

                                * * * * *

                                  FINIS.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GRACIOUS DESIGNS OF GOD***


******* This file should be named 58535-0.txt or 58535-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/5/8/5/3/58535


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

